Chapter Outline
Chapter Outl inMinerals of 
Earth’s Crust
Why It Matters
Understanding the properties of minerals 
is important for being able to identify and use them. Minerals are used to make millions of products, from airplanes to zippers. ●1 What Is a Mineral?
Characteristics of Minerals
Kinds of MineralsCrystalline StructureCrystalline Structure 
of Silicate Minerals
Crystalline Structure of 
Nonsilicate Minerals
 ●2 Identifying Minerals
Physical Properties of Minerals
Special Properties of 
Minerals
108 Chapter 5
ne
5
Chapter
hq10sena_mincho.indd   108hq10sena_mincho.indd   108 7/30/08   11:20:57 AM7/30/08   11:20:57 AM PDFInquiry Lab
 30 min
109Magnetic Minerals
Use a bar magnet to decide which of the 
mineral samples given to you have magnetic properties. Then, test the magnetic minerals using a directional compass. Use your observations of their effect on the compass needle to arrange the minerals in order of increasing magnetic strength.
Questions to Get You Started
 1. How can a bar magnet help you to distinguish certain types of minerals from others?
 2. How can a directional compass be used to compare magnetic strength?
 3. Which element or elements do you think are present in a magnetic mineral?
hq10sena_mincho.indd   109hq10sena_mincho.indd   109 7/30/08   11:21:19 AM7/30/08   11:21:19 AM PDF110 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s CrustThese reading tools will help you learn the material in this chapter. 
For more information on how to use these and other tools, see Appendix A.FoldNotes
Key-Term Fold The key-term fold can help 
you learn key terms from this chapter, such 
as the physical properties that help distinguish one mineral from another.
Your Turn Create a key-term fold, as 
described in Appendix A.
1 Write one of the physical properties of 
minerals on the front of each tab.
2 Write a definition or description for each term under its tab.3 Use this FoldNote to help you study the key terms in this chapter. Note Taking
Two-Column Notes Two-column notes 
can help you learn the key ideas from each 
section.• Write the key ideas in the left column.
•  In your own words, record notes and examples in the right column.
Your Turn Complete the two-column 
notes for Section 1, adding another row for each key idea.Classification
Kinds of Minerals Classification is a tool 
for organizing objects and ideas by grouping them into categories. Groups are classified by defining characteristics. One of the ways that minerals can be classified is on the basis of their composition. For example, some minerals contain the element silicon and others do not. Based on this fact, minerals can be classified into two major groups.
Your Turn In Section 1, you will learn 
about two major groups of minerals. As 
you learn about these groups, make a table with three columns. In the first column, list each of the kinds of minerals. In the second column, describe the basis for classifying minerals as one of these kinds. In the third column, list examples and descriptions of each kind of mineral.
KEY IDEA #1 A mineral is a solid that meets all 
four of these criteria:
Define mineral. • It is inorganic.
• It occurs naturally.
• It is crystalline.•  It has a consistent chemical 
composition.
color
hq10sena_mintoolx.indd   110hq10sena_mintoolx.indd   110 7/30/08   11:18:46 AM7/30/08   11:18:46 AM PDFSECTION
Section 1  What Is a Mineral? 111Key Ideas Key Terms Why It Matters
A ruby, a gold nugget, and a grain of salt look very different from 
one another, but they have one thing in common. They are minerals, 
the basic materials of Earth’s crust. A mineralmineral is a  natural, usually inor-
ganic solid that has a characteristic chemical composition, an orderly internal structure, and a characteristic set of physical properties.
Characteristics of Minerals
To determine whether a substance is a mineral or a nonmin-
eral, scientists ask four basic questions, as shown in Table 1.  If the 
answer to all four questions is yes, the substance is a mineral.
First, is the substance inorganic? An inorganic substance is one 
that is not made up of living things or the remains of  living things. Coal, for example, is organic—it is composed of the remains of ancient plants. Thus, coal is not a mineral. 
Second, does the substance occur naturally? Minerals form and 
exist in nature. Thus, a manufactured substance, such as steel or brass, is not a mineral. 
Third, is the substance a solid in crystalline form? The volcanic 
glass obsidian is a naturally occurring substance. However, the atoms in obsidian are not arranged in a regularly repeating crystal-line structure. Thus, obsidian is not a mineral.
Finally, does the substance have a consistent chemical compo-
sition? The mineral fluorite has a consistent chemical composition of one calcium ion for every two fluoride ions. Granite, however, can have a variety of substances. The ratio of these substances com-monly varies in each sample of granite.
eyydeas
❯ Define mineral.
❯ Compare the two main groups of minerals.
❯ Identify the six types of silicate crystalline 
structures.
❯ Describe three common nonsilicate crystalline 
structures.mineral
silicate mineralnonsilicate mineralcrystalsilicon-oxygen 
tetrahedronAlmost everything you do 
each day—from brushing your teeth in the morn-ing to setting your alarm clock at night—involves minerals in some way.1
s
 Key Terms
 Why It Matters
 s
 eyyes
 yyt atte s
What Is a Mineral?
mineral  a natural, usually 
inorganic solid that has a 
characteristic chemical composition, an orderly internal structure, and a characteristic set of physical properties
Table 1 Four Criteria for Minerals
Questions to Identify a Mineral Coal Brass Obsidian Basalt Fluorite
Is it inorganic? No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Does it occur naturally? No Yes Yes Yes
Is it a crystalline solid? No Yes Yes
Does it have a consistent chemical composition? No Yeswww.scilinks.org
Topic: MineralsCode: HQX0966
hq10sena_minsec1.indd   111hq10sena_minsec1.indd   111 7/30/08   11:21:45 AM7/30/08   11:21:45 AM PDFA Mineral for Your MouthWhy It Matters
Fluoride hardens tooth 
enamel, protecting teeth from the bacteria that cause cavities and gum disease.
Fluoride is found in many non-silicate 
minerals. It is also a powerful ally in the battle against the bacteria that work 24/7 to decay your teeth. When fluoride is naturally present in drinking water, people develop fewer cavities, so fluoride is added to the water supply and to many dental products. About 60% of the U.S. population drink fluoridated water. Some people 
oppose its use, however, because too much fluoride can damage bones and discolor teeth.
o
h
to
c
a
 
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS
What are the benefits and risks of adding fluoride to drinking water?
112Kinds of Minerals
Earth scientists have identified more than 
4,000 minerals, but fewer than 20 of the miner-
als are common. The common minerals are called rock-forming minerals because they form 
the rocks that make up Earth’s crust. Three of 
these minerals are shown in 
Figure 1.  Of the 20 rock-forming min-
erals, about half are so common that they make up 90% of the mass of Earth’s crust. These include quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase, mus-covite, biotite, calcite, dolomite, halite, gypsum, and ferromagne-sian minerals. All minerals, however, can be classified into two main groups—silicate minerals and nonsilicate minerals—based on the chemical compositions of the minerals. 
Silicate Minerals
A mineral that contains a combination of silicon, Si, and oxy-
gen, O, is a silicate mineral.silicate mineral. The mineral quartz has only silicon 
and oxygen atoms. However, other silicate minerals have one or more additional elements. Feldspars are the most common silicate minerals. The type of feldspar that forms depends on which metal combines with the silicon and oxygen atoms. Orthoclase forms when the metal is potassium, K. Plagioclase forms when the metal is sodium, Na, calcium, Ca, or both.
In addition to quartz and the feldspars, ferromagnesian 
 minerals—which are rich in iron, Fe, and magnesium, Mg—are silicates. These minerals include olivines, pyroxenes, amphiboles, and biotite. Silicate minerals make up 96% of Earth’s crust. Feldspars and quartz alone make up more than 50% of the crust.Figure 1  Plagioclase feldspar 
(left), muscovite mica (center), 
and orthoclase feldspar (right) are 3 of the  20 common rock-forming minerals.
silicate mineral  a mineral that 
contains a combination of 
silicon and oxygen and that may also contain one or more metals
hq10sena_minsec1.indd   112hq10sena_minsec1.indd   112 7/30/08   11:21:47 AM7/30/08   11:21:47 AM PDFSection 1  What Is a Mineral? 113Nonsilicate Minerals
Approximately 4% of Earth’s crust is made up of minerals that 
do not contain compounds of silicon and oxygen, or nonsilicate nonsilicate 
minerals.minerals. Table 2  organizes the six major groups of nonsilicate 
minerals by their chemical compositions: carbonates, halides, 
native elements, oxides, sulfates, and sulfides.
 What compounds will you never find in a 
nonsilicate mineral? (See Appendix G for answers to Reading Checks.)nonsilicate mineral  a mineral 
that does not contain 
compounds of silicon and oxygenTable 2 Major Classes of Nonsilicate Minerals
Carbonates
compounds that contain a 
carbonate group (CO3)
Dolomite, CaMg(CO3)2Calcite, CaCO3
Halides
compounds that consist of 
chlorine or fluorine combined with sodium, potassium, or calcium
Halite, NaCl Fluorite, CaF
2
Native elements
elements uncombined with 
other elements
Silver, Ag Copper, Cu
Oxides
compounds that contain oxygen 
and an element other than silicon
Corundum, Al
2O3Hematite, Fe2O3
Sulfates
compounds that contain a 
sulfate group (SO4)
Gypsum, CaSO4 • 2H2O Anhydrite, CaSO4
Sulfides
compounds that consist of one 
or more elements combined with sulfur
Galena, PbS Pyrite, FeS
2
hq10sena_minsec1.indd   113hq10sena_minsec1.indd   113 7/30/08   11:22:19 AM7/30/08   11:22:19 AM PDF114 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s CrustCrystalline Structure
All minerals in Earth’s crust have a crystalline structure. Each 
type of mineral crystal is characterized by a specific geometric 
arrangement of atoms. A crystalcrystal is a solid whose atoms, ions, or 
molecules are arranged in a regular, repeating pattern. A large mineral crystal displays the characteristic geometry of that crys-tal’s internal structure. The conditions under which minerals form, however, often hinder the growth of single, large crystals. As a result, minerals are commonly made up of masses of crystals that are so small you can see them only with a microscope. But, if a crystal forms where the surrounding material is not restrictive, the mineral will develop as a single, large crystal that has one of six basic crystal shapes. Knowing the crystal shapes is helpful in  identifying minerals.
One way that scientists study the structure of crystals is by 
using X rays. X rays that pass through a crystal and strike a photo-graphic plate produce an image that shows the geometric arrange-ment of the atoms that make up the crystal.
Crystalline Structure of Silicate Minerals
Even though there are many kinds of silicate minerals, their 
crystalline structure is made up of the same basic building blocks. Each building block has four oxygen atoms arranged in a pyramid with one silicon atom in the center. 
Figure 2  shows this four-sided 
structure, which is known as a silicon-oxygen tetrahedron.silicon-oxygen tetrahedron.
Silicon-oxygen tetrahedra combine in different arrangements 
to form different silicate minerals. The various arrangements are the result of the kinds of bonds that form between the oxygen atoms of the tetrahedra and other atoms. The oxygen atoms of tet-rahedra may be shared with those of neighboring tetrahedra. Bonds may also form between the oxygen atoms in the tetrahedra and other elements’ atoms outside of the tetrahedra.
 What is the building block of the silicate 
crystalline structure?crystal  a solid whose atoms, 
ions, or molecules are arranged 
in a regular, repeating pattern
silicon-oxygen tetrahedron   
the basic unit of the structure of silicate minerals; a silicon ion chemically bonded to and surrounded by four oxygen ions
Modeling 
Tetrahedra
Procedure
1 Place four toothpicks in a 
small marshmallow. Evenly space the toothpicks as far from each other as possible.
2 Place four large marsh-
mallows on the ends of the toothpicks.
Analysis
1. In your model, what do the 
toothpicks represent?
2. When tetrahedra form 
chains or rings, they share oxygen atoms. If you wanted to build a chain of tetrahedra, how would you connect two tetrahedra together?
Quick Lab5 min
SiliconOxygen
Keyword: HQXMINF2Figure 2  The structure of a silicon-
oxygen tetrahedron can be shown 
by two different models. The model on the left represents the relative size and proximity of the atoms to one another in the molecule. The model on the right shows the tetrahedral shape of the molecule.
hq10sena_minsec1.indd   114hq10sena_minsec1.indd   114 7/30/08   11:23:05 AM7/30/08   11:23:05 AM PDFSection 1  What Is a Mineral? 115Isolated Tetrahedral Silicates 
and Ring Silicates
Six kinds of arrangements that tetrahe-
dra form are shown in Figure 3.  In miner-
als that have isolated tetrahedra, only atoms 
other than silicon and oxygen atoms link silicon-oxygen tetrahedra. For example, olivine is a mineral that forms when the oxygen atoms of tetrahedra bond to mag-nesium, Mg, and iron, Fe, atoms.
Ring silicates form when shared oxygen 
atoms join the tetrahedra to form three-, four-, or six-sided rings. The rings can align to create channels that can contain a vari-ety of ions, molecules, and neutral atoms. Beryl and tourmaline are minerals that have ring-silicate structures.
Single-Chain Silicates and 
Double-Chain Silicates
In single-chain silicates, each tetrahedron 
shares corner oxygen atoms with two others. 
In double-chain silicates, two single chains of 
tetrahedra link to each other by sharing oxy-gen atoms. Most single-chain silicate miner-als are called pyroxenes, and those made up of double chains are called amphiboles.
Sheet Silicates and Framework 
Silicates
In the sheet silicates, each tetrahedron 
shares three oxygen atoms with other tetra-
hedra. The unshared oxygen atoms bond with aluminum, Al, or magnesium atoms that hold other sheets of silicon-oxygen tet-rahedra together. The mica minerals, such as muscovite and biotite, are examples of sheet silicates. 
In the framework silicates, each tetrahe-
dron shares all of its oxygen atoms with  four neighboring tetrahedra to form a three-dimensional network. Frameworks that contain only silicon- oxygen tetrahe-dra form the mineral quartz. The chemi-cal formula for quartz is SiO
2. Other 
framework silicates, such as the feldspars, contain some tetrahedra in which atoms of aluminum substitute for some of the silicon atoms.Figure 3  Six Kinds of Silicate-Mineral Arrangements
1 Isolated tetrahedra do not link 
with other silicon or oxygen atoms.
3 Single-chain 
silicates form a chain 
by sharing oxygen atoms.
5 Sheet silicates form 
when each tetrahedron shares three of its oxygen atoms with other tetrahedra.2 Ring silicates form rings 
by sharing oxygen atoms.
4 Double-chain 
silicates form when two single chains of tetrahedra link to each other by sharing oxygen atoms.
6 Framework silicates 
form when each tetrahe-dron is bonded to four other tetrahedra.
hq10sena_minsec1.indd   115hq10sena_minsec1.indd   115 2/23/09   8:45:50 AM2/23/09   8:45:50 AM116 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s Crust
Section 1  Review
Key Ideas
1. Define mineral.
2. Summarize the characteristics that are necessary 
to classify a substance as a mineral.
3. Compare the two main groups of minerals.
4. Identify the two elements that are in all silicate minerals.
5. Name six types of nonsilicate minerals.
6. Describe the six main crystalline structures of silicate minerals.
7. Explain why nonsilicate minerals have a wider variety of crystalline structures than silicate minerals do.Critical Thinking
 8. Predicting Consequences If silicon bonded with three oxygen atoms, how might the crystal-line structures of silicate minerals be different?
 9. Applying Ideas Gold is an inorganic substance that forms naturally in Earth’s crust. Gold is also a solid and has a definite chemical composition. Is gold a mineral? Explain your answer.
Concept Mapping
 10. Use the following terms to create a concept map: mineral, crystal, silicate mineral, nonsilicate mineral, ring silicate, framework silicate, single-chain silicate, and silicon-oxygen tetrahedron.Crystalline Structure 
of Nonsilicate Minerals
Because nonsilicate minerals have diverse chemical composi-
tions, nonsilicate minerals display a vast variety of crystalline 
structures. Common crystal structures for nonsilicate minerals include cubes, hexagonal prisms, and irregular masses. Some of these structures are shown in 
Figure 4.
Nonsilicates may form tetrahedra that are similar to those in 
silicates. However, the ions at the center of these tetrahedra are not silicon. Minerals that have the same ion at the center of the tetrahe-dron commonly share similar crystal structures. Thus, the classes of nonsilicate minerals can be divided into smaller groups based on the structural similarities of the minerals’ crystals.
The structure of a nonsilicate crystal determines the nonsili-
cate’s characteristics. For example, the native elements have very high densities because their crystal structures are based on the packing of atoms as close together as possible. This crystal struc-ture is called closest packing. In this crystal structure, each metal atom is surrounded by 12 other metal atoms that are as close to each other as the charges of the atomic nuclei will allow.Figure 4  Gold (left) commonly 
has a dendritic shape. Halite 
(center) commonly has cubic crystals. Diamond (right)  commonly has an octahedral crystal shape. All three of these minerals are nonsilicates.
Academic Vocabulary
similar (SIM uh luhr) alike; almost the 
same
Key-Term Fold
Create a key-term fold for the key terms in Section 1. Add other terms that you want to remember, such as the six kinds of silicate crystal structures.
hq10sena_minsec1.indd   116hq10sena_minsec1.indd   116 7/30/08   11:23:09 AM7/30/08   11:23:09 AM PDFSECTION
Section 2  Identifying Minerals 117Key Ideas Key Terms Why It Matters
Earth scientists called mineralogistsmineralogists examine, analyze, and clas-
sify minerals. To identify minerals, mineralogists study the prop-
erties of the minerals. Some properties are simple to study, while special equipment may be needed to study other properties.
Physical Properties of Minerals
Each mineral has specific properties that are a result of its 
chemical composition and crystalline structure. These properties provide useful clues for identifying minerals. Many of these prop-erties can be identified by simply looking at a sample of the min-eral. Other properties can be identified through simple tests.
Color
One property of a mineral that is easy to observe is the mineral’s 
color. Some minerals have very distinct colors. For example, sulfur is bright yellow, and azurite is deep blue. Color alone, however, is gen-erally not a reliable clue for identifying a mineral sample. Many min-erals are similar in color, and very small amounts of certain elements may greatly affect the color of a mineral. For example, corundum is a colorless mineral composed of alumi-num and oxygen atoms. However, corundum that has traces of chromium, Cr, forms the red gem called ruby. Sapphire, which is a type of corundum, gets its blue color from traces of iron, Fe, and titanium, Ti. 
Figure 1  compares colorless, pure quartz with purple 
amethyst. Amethyst is quartz that has manganese, Mn, and iron, Fe, which cause the purple color. 
Color is also an unreliable identification clue 
because weathered surfaces may hide the color of minerals. For example, the golden color of iron pyrite ranges from dark yellow to black when iron pyrite is weathered. When examining a mineral for color, you should inspect only the mineral’s freshly exposed surfaces.
s
 Key Terms
 Why It Matters
Identifying Minerals2
eyydeas
s
 eyyes
 yyta t t e s
❯ Describe seven physical properties 
that help to distinguish one mineral 
from another.
❯ List five special properties that may 
help to identify certain minerals.mineralogist
streaklustercleavagefractureMohs hardness 
scale 
density Some minerals glow in 
the dark; others are magnetic. The properties of minerals help people to identify and use them.
mineralogist  a person who 
examines, analyzes, and 
classifies minerals
Figure 1  Pure quartz (above) is 
colorless. Amethyst (right) is a 
variety of quartz that is purple because of the presence of small amounts of manganese and iron.
hq10sena_minsec2.indd   117hq10sena_minsec2.indd   117 7/30/08   11:19:12 AM7/30/08   11:19:12 AM PDF118 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s CrustStreak
A more reliable clue to the identity of a mineral is the color of 
the mineral in powdered form, which is called the mineral’s streak. streak. 
The easiest way to observe the streak of a mineral is to rub some of 
the mineral against a piece of unglazed ceramic tile called a streak plate. The streak’s color may differ from the color of the solid form of the mineral. Metallic minerals generally have a dark streak. For example, the streak of gold-colored pyrite is black. For most non-metallic minerals, however, the streak is either colorless or a very light shade of the mineral’s standard color. Minerals that are harder than the ceramic plate will leave no streak.
Luster
Light that is reflected from a mineral’s surface is called luster. luster. 
A mineral is said to have a metallic luster if the mineral reflects light as polished metal does, as shown in 
Figure 2.  All other minerals 
have a nonmetallic luster. Mineralogists distinguish several types of nonmetallic luster. Transparent quartz and other minerals that look like glass have a glassy luster. Minerals that have the appear-ance of candle wax have a waxy luster. Some minerals, such as the mica minerals, have a pearly luster. Diamond is an example of a mineral that has a brilliant luster. A mineral that lacks any shiny appearance has a dull or earthy luster.
Cleavage and Fracture
The tendency of a mineral to split along specific planes of weak-
ness to form smooth, flat surfaces is called cleavage.cleavage. When a min-
eral has cleavage, as shown in Figure 3,  it breaks along flat surfaces 
that generally run parallel to planes of weakness in the crystal structure. For example, the mica minerals, which are sheet silicates, tend to split into parallel sheets.
Many minerals, however, do not break along cleavage planes. 
Instead, they 
fracture,fracture, or break unevenly, into pieces that have 
curved or irregular surfaces. Mineralogists describe a fracture according to the appearance of the broken surface. For example, a rough surface has an uneven or irregular fracture. A broken surface that looks like a piece of broken wood has a splintery or fibrous fracture. Curved surfaces are conchoidal fractures (kahng KOYD uhl FRAK chuhr), as shown in 
Figure 3.Figure 2  All minerals have 
either a metallic luster, as 
platinum does (top), or a nonmetallic luster, as talc does (bottom).
Figure 3  Calcite is a mineral 
that cleaves in three direc-tions. Quartz (right) tends to have a conchoidal fracture.streak  the color of a mineral in 
powdered form
luster  the way in which a 
mineral reflects light
cleavage  the tendency of a 
mineral to split along specific 
planes of weakness to form smooth, flat surfaces
fracture  the manner in which a 
mineral breaks along either curved or irregular surfaces
Academic Vocabulary
specific (spuh SIF ik) unique; peculiar 
to or characteristic of; exact
hq10sena_minsec2.indd   118hq10sena_minsec2.indd   118 7/30/08   11:19:26 AM7/30/08   11:19:26 AM PDFSection 2  Identifying Minerals 119Hardness
The measure of the ability of a mineral to resist scratching is 
called hardness. Hardness does not mean “resistance to cleavage or 
fracture.” A diamond, for example, is extremely hard but can be 
split along cleavage planes more easily than calcite, a softer min-eral, can be split.
To determine the hardness of an unknown mineral, you can 
scratch the mineral against those on the 
Mohs hardness scale,Mohs hardness scale,
which is shown in Table 1.  This scale lists 10 minerals in order of 
increasing hardness. The softest mineral, talc, has a hardness of 1. The hardest mineral, diamond, has a hardness of 10. The difference in hardness between two consecutive minerals is about the same throughout the scale except for the difference between the two hardest minerals. Diamond (10) is much harder than corundum (9), which is listed on the scale before diamond.
To test an unknown mineral for hardness, you must determine 
the hardest mineral on the scale that the unknown mineral can scratch. For example, galena can scratch gypsum but not calcite. Thus, galena has a hardness that ranges between 2 and 3 on the Mohs hardness scale. If neither of two minerals scratches the other, the minerals have the same hardness.
The strength of the bonds between the atoms that make up a 
mineral’s internal structure determines the hardness of that min-eral. Both diamond and graphite consist only of carbon atoms. However, diamond has a hardness of 10, while the hardness of graphite is between 1 and 2. A diamond’s hardness results from a strong crystalline structure in which each carbon atom is firmly bonded to four other carbon atoms. In contrast, the carbon atoms in graphite are arranged in layers that are held together by much weaker chemical bonds.
 What determines the hardness of a mineral?Table 1 Mohs Hardness Scale
Mineral Hardness Common test Mineral Hardness Common test
Talc 1 easily scratched by 
ﬁngernailFeldspar 6 scratches glass, but does not scratch steel
Gypsum 2 can be scratched by ﬁngernailQuartz 7 easily scratches both glass and steel
Calcite 3 barely can be scratched by copper pennyTopaz 8 scratches quartz
Fluorite 4 easily scratched with steel ﬁle or glassCorundum 9 scratches topaz
Apatite 5 can be scratched by steel ﬁle or glassDiamond 10 scratches everything
Two-Column Notes
Create two-column notes to outline all the physical proper-ties of minerals, including special properties, that miner-alogists can use to help them identify minerals. Put the physical properties in the first column, and add notes and examples in the second column.
Mohs hardness scale  the 
standard scale against which the 
hardness of minerals is ratedwww.scilinks.org
Topic: Mineral IdentificationCode: HQX0965
hq10sena_minsec2.indd   119hq10sena_minsec2.indd   119 7/30/08   11:19:44 AM7/30/08   11:19:44 AM PDF120 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s CrustCrystal Shape
A mineral crystal forms in one of six basic shapes, as shown in 
Table 2.  A certain mineral always has the same basic crystal sys-
tem because the atoms that form its crystals always combine in the 
same geometric pattern. But the six basic shapes can become more complex as a result of environmental conditions during crystal growth, such as temperature and pressure.
Density
When handling equal-sized specimens of various minerals, you 
may notice that some feel heavier than others do. For example, a piece of galena feels heavier than a piece of quartz of the same size does. However, a more precise comparison can be made by mea-suring the density of a sample. 
DensityDensity is the ratio of the mass of a 
substance to the volume of the substance.
The density of a mineral depends on the kinds of atoms that the 
mineral has and on how closely the atoms are packed. Most of the common minerals in Earth’s crust have densities between 2 and 3 g/cm
3. However, the densities of minerals that contain heavy 
metals, such as lead, uranium, gold, and silver, range from 7 to 20 g/cm
3. Thus, density helps identify heavier minerals more read-
ily than it helps identify lighter ones.
Calculating Density  A 
mineral sample has a mass (m) 
of 85 g and a volume (V) of 34 cm
3. Use the equation 
below to calculate the sam-ple’s density (D).
m
VD /L1155
lating
 Calcul
alcul
density  the ratio of the mass of 
a substance to the volume of 
the substance; commonly expressed as grams per cubic centimeter for solids and liquids and as grams per liter for gasesTable 2 The Six Basic Crystal Systems
Isometric or Cubic 
System Three axes of equal length intersect at 90° angles.Orthorhombic System Three axes of unequal length intersect at 90° angles.
Tetragonal System Three axes intersect at 90° angles. The two horizontal axes are of equal length. The vertical axis is longer or shorter than the horizontal axes.Hexagonal System Three horizontal axes of the same length intersect at 120° angles. The vertical axis is longer or shorter than the horizontal axes.
Monoclinic System Two of the three axes of unequal length intersect at 90° angles. The third axis is oblique to the others.Triclinic System Three axes of unequal length are oblique to one another.
hq10sena_minsec2.indd   120hq10sena_minsec2.indd   120 7/30/08   11:19:47 AM7/30/08   11:19:47 AM PDFSection 2  Identifying Minerals 121
Figure 4  The ﬂuorescent 
minerals calcite and willemite 
within this rock change colors as they are exposed to ordinary light (top) and ultraviolet light (bottom).
Special Properties of Minerals
All minerals exhibit the properties that were described earlier 
in this section. However, a few minerals have some additional, 
special properties that can help identify those minerals. 
Fluorescence and Phosphorescence
The mineral calcite is usually white in ordinary light, but in 
ultraviolet light, calcite often appears red. This ability to glow under ultraviolet light is called fluorescence. Fluorescent minerals absorb ultraviolet light and then produce visible light of various colors, as shown in 
Figure 4.
When subjected to ultraviolet light, some minerals will con-
tinue to glow after the ultraviolet light is turned off. This property is called phosphorescence. It is useful in the mining of phosphores-cent minerals such as eucryptite, which is an ore of lithium.
Chatoyancy and Asterism
In reflected light, some minerals display a silky appearance that 
is called chatoyancy (shuh TOY uhn see). This effect is also called the cat’s-eye effect. The word chatoyancy comes from the French 
word chat, which means “cat,” and from oeil, which means “eye.” 
Chatoyancy is the result of closely packed parallel fibers within the mineral. A similar effect called asterism is the phenomenon in which a six-sided star shape appears when a mineral reflects light.
 What is the difference between chatoyancy 
and asterism?
Determining Density
Procedure
1 Use a triple-beam balance to determine the 
mass of three similarly sized mineral samples 
that have different masses. Record the mass of each mineral sample.
2 Fill a graduated cylinder with 70 mL of water.
3 Add one mineral sample to the water in the 
graduated cylinder. Record the new volume after the mineral sample is added to the water.
4 Calculate the volume of the mineral sample by 
subtracting 70 mL from the new volume.
5 Repeat steps 3 and 4 for the other two mineral 
samples.
6 Convert the volume of the mineral samples that 
you calculated in step 4 from milliliters to cubic centimeters by using the conversion: 
1 mL/H110051 cm
3.Analysis
1. Calculate the density of each mineral sample by 
using the following equation:
density /H11005 mass/volume
2. Compare the density of each mineral sample with 
the density of common minerals in Earth’s crust. 
Compare the density of each mineral sample with minerals that contain a high percentage of heavy metals.
3. Do any of the mineral samples contain a high 
percentage of heavy metals? Explain your answer.
Quick Lab15 min
hq10sena_minsec2.indd   121hq10sena_minsec2.indd   121 7/30/08   11:19:49 AM7/30/08   11:19:49 AM PDF122 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s CrustDouble Refraction
Light rays bend as they pass through transparent 
minerals. This bending of light rays as they pass from 
one substance, such as air, to another, such as a mineral, is called refraction. Crystals of calcite and some other transparent minerals bend light in such a way that they produce a double image of any object viewed through them, as shown in 
Figure 5.  This property is called 
double refraction. Double refraction takes place because light rays are split into two parts as they enter the crystal.
Magnetism
Magnets may attract small particles of some miner-
als that contain iron. Those minerals are also sometimes magnetic. In general, nonsilicate minerals that contain 
iron, such as magnetite, are more likely to be magnetic than other nonsilicate minerals are. Lodestone is a form of magnetite. Like a bar magnet, some pieces of lodestone have a north pole at one end and a south pole at the other. The needles of the first magnetic compasses were made of tiny slivers of lodestone.
Radioactivity
Some minerals have a property known as radioactivity. The 
arrangement of protons and neutrons in the nuclei of some atoms is unstable. Radioactivity results as unstable nuclei decay over time into stable nuclei by releasing particles and energy. A Geiger counter can be used to detect the released particles and, thus, to identify minerals that are radioactive. Uranium, U, and radium, Ra, are examples of radioactive elements. Pitchblende is the most common mineral that contains uranium. Other uranium-bearing minerals are carnotite and autunite.
Key Ideas
1. Describe seven physical properties that help 
distinguish one mineral from another.
2. Identify the two main types of luster.
3. Summarize how you would determine the hardness of an unidentified mineral sample.
4. Explain why color is an unreliable clue to the identity of a mineral.
5. List five special properties that may help to identify certain minerals.
6. Explain how magnetism can be useful for identifying minerals.Critical Thinking
7. Evaluating Data An unknown mineral has a black streak and a density of 18 g/cm
3. Is the 
mineral more likely to be metallic or nonmetallic?
8. Analyzing Methods Explain how phosphores-cence is helpful in mining eucryptite. Describe other ways in which phosphorescent minerals might be used.
Concept Mapping
9. Use the following terms to create a concept map: luster, streak, fracture, hardness, Mohs hardness scale, streak plate, nonmetallic luster, metallic luster, and conchoidal fracture.
KeyIdeas
Section 2  ReviewFigure 5  Some forms of the 
mineral calcite exhibit double 
refraction when light rays enter the crystal and split.
hq10sena_minsec2.indd   122hq10sena_minsec2.indd   122 7/30/08   11:20:01 AM7/30/08   11:20:01 AM PDF123Why It Matters
Know by the Glow
CRITICAL THINKING
Explain how a service technician could use fluorescent dye to find a leak in an air conditioner.
ONLINE RESEARCH
The fluorescent strip in paper money is one of many security features used in bills. Find out about special inks, watermarks, and fine printing details that help foil counterfeiters. 
U.S. currency is the most 
counterfeited money in the world. Security features on a $20 bill include a plastic strip to the left of President Jackson’s portrait. The strip fluoresces green in ultraviolet light.
Fluorescence is one o f the spec ial proper ties of 
 Fl i f th i l t if
some minera ls. This same property is use d for 
identification and authentication purposes.
Invisible fluorescent inks are used on checks
and im portant documents. These inks cannot 
be copie d by scanners or repro duced by color 
printers, but the y are seen when ex posed to
ultravio let light (also ca lled black light). Man y 
plant an d anima l tissues fluoresce un der black
light. Crime investigators can use fluoresce nt 
chemicals to reveal traces of blood  that 
otherwise would be invisible .
Fluorescent inks are used in hand stamps at amusement parks to allow re-entry privileges. The stamp does not leave a visible mark, but it easily identifies paying customers.
F
in
a
a
T
a 
e
c
Fingerprints glow when illuminated by black light. Fluorescent dyes of different colors may be used to give better contrast.
Highlighter pens are available in a variety of colors. When used on paper or fabric with similar color, you can write or create designs only visible in black light.
H
a
c
p
si
w
o
Real amber, especially if it contains an insect, is expensive. Fake amber is easily made using colored plastic. A black light can detect a fake, because only real amber fluoresces.
UScurrencyisthemost
hq10sena_minwim.indd   123hq10sena_minwim.indd   123 7/30/08   11:20:30 AM7/30/08   11:20:30 AM PDFSkills Practice Lab
Step 4
 45 min
124
What You’ll Do
❯ Identify several unknown 
mineral samples.
❯ Evaluate which properties of minerals are most useful in identifying mineral samples.
What You’ll Need
file, steelGuide to Common Minerals 
(in the Reference Tables 
section of the Appendix)
hand lens
mineral samples (5)penny, coppersquare, glassstreak plate
Safety
 Mineral Identification
A mineral identification key can be used to compare the prop erties of minerals so that unknown mineral samples can be identified. Mineral properties that are often used in mineral identification keys are color, hardness, streak, luster, cleavage, and fracture. Hardness is determined by a scratch test. The Mohs hardness scale classifies minerals from 1 (soft) to 10 (hard). Streak is the color of a mineral in a finely powdered form. The streak shows less variation than the color of a sample does and thus is more useful in identification. The luster of a mineral is either metallic (having an appearance of metals) or nonmetallic. Cleavage is the tendency of a mineral to split along a plane. Planes may be in several directions. Other min erals break into irregular fragments in a process called fracture. In this lab, you will use these properties to classify several mineral samples.
1 Make a table with columns for sample number, color/luster, hard-
ness, streak, cleavage/fracture, and mineral name.
2 Observe and record in your table the color of each mineral sample. 
Note whether the luster of each mineral is metallic or nonmetallic.
3 Rub each mineral against the streak plate, and determine the color 
of the mineral’s streak. Record your observations.
1
Make a table with cProcedure
hq10sena_minlab.indd   124hq10sena_minlab.indd   124 7/30/08   11:18:53 AM7/30/08   11:18:53 AM PDFChapter 5  Skills Practice Lab 1254 Using a fingernail, copper penny, glass square, and steel file, test 
each mineral to determine its hardness based on the Mohs hardness 
scale. Arrange the minerals in order of hardness. Record your observations in your table.
5 Determine whether the surface of each mineral displays cleavage 
and/or fracture. Record your observations.
6 Use the Guide to Common Minerals in the Reference Tables section 
of the Appendix to help you identify the mineral samples. Remember that samples of the same mineral will vary somewhat.
 1. Analyzing Results For each mineral, compare the streak with the 
color of the mineral. Which minerals have the same color as their streak? Which do not?
 2. Classifying Information Of the mineral samples you identified, 
how many were silicate minerals? How many were nonsilicate minerals?
 3. Analyzing Methods Did you find any properties that were 
especially useful or especially not useful in identifying each sample? Identify these properties, and explain why they were or were not useful.
 4. Evaluating Methods If you had to write a manual to explain, step 
by step, how to identify minerals, in what order would you test different properties? Explain your reasoning.
1
AnalyzingResAnalysis
Sample 
number Color/ luster Cleavage/fractureMineral name Hardness Streak
1
2
3
4
5 DO NOT WRITE IN THIS BOOKDO NOT WRITE IN THIS BOOK
Understanding Relationships Corundum, rubies, and sapphires 
have different colors but are considered to be the same mineral. 
Diamonds and graphite are made of the element carbon but are not considered to be the same mineral. Research these minerals, and explain why they are classified in this way.
Understanding RelaExtension
hq10sena_minlab.indd   125hq10sena_minlab.indd   125 7/30/08   11:19:03 AM7/30/08   11:19:03 AM PDF0 500 Miles
0 500 KilometersSCALE
250250
Projection: Albers Equal Area
140°W 150°W
170°W180°60°N80°NArctic Circle ARCTIC OCEAN 
Gulf of
AlaskaBERING
SEA
160°W20°N155°W
PACIFIC
OCEANStone (crushed) 13.1
Cement 9.8Copper 8.6Sand and gravel 7.9Gold 5.1Molybdenum 3.2Iron ore 2.9
Zinc 2.3Lime 1.7Salt 1.0
Total production value 55.6Commodity Production value
(in billions of dollars)*
*rounded to hundreds of millions of dollarsME
MDNH
VT
MA
CTRI
NJ
DE
ALARNY
PA
VA WV
NC
SC
GA
FLTNKYOH
INMI
ILIAWIMN
MO
LAMS
TXOKKSNESDNDMT
WY
CO
NMAZUTIDWA
OR
CANV
HIAKCANADA
CANADARUSSIAMEXICO40°N50°N50°N
120°W
120°W 110°W
100°W
90°W80°W70°W60°W110°W 100°W90°W 80°W 70°W
60°W
30°N30°N
20°NTropic of Cancer N
SE
WLake Michigan Lake Superior 
L.Ontario
Lake Erie
Great Salt
LakeLake Huron 
  GULF OF MEXICO Chesapeake Bay   ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Map   Skills Activity
This map shows the distribution of the top 10 rock 
and mineral commodities produced in the United States. The key provides production values for these commodities. Use the map to answer the questions below.
 1.  Using a Key According to the map, which 
commodity has the highest production value?
 2. Evaluating Data Gold, copper, iron ore, and 
zinc are metals in the top 10 mineral commodi-
ties produced. What percentage of the total production value do these metals represent? Which of the states produce these metals? 3. Using a Key Find your state on the map. 
Which of the top 10 mineral commodities are produced in your state?
 4. Evaluating Data Stone, sand, and gravel are 
collectively known as aggregates. What percent-age of the total production value of the 10 commodities listed do aggregates represent? 
 5. Analyzing Relationships According to the 
map, the states that produce enough iron ore to make the top-10 list are located in the western part of the United States. What geologic feature do most of these states share?
126 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s CrustRock and Mineral Production 
in the United States
hq10sena_minmia.indd   126hq10sena_minmia.indd   126 7/30/08   11:21:35 AM7/30/08   11:21:35 AM PDFSummary
5
Chapter
Chapter 5  Summary 127Key Ideas Key TermsKeyword: HQXMINS
 Section 1 What Is a Mineral?
❯ A mineral is a natural, usually inorganic solid that has a 
characteristic chemical composition, an orderly internal 
structure, and a characteristic set of physical properties.
❯ The two main types of minerals, silicates and nonsilicates, are 
classified based on differences in their composition. Silicates contain compounds of silicon and oxygen; nonsilicates do not.
❯ Six types of silicate crystalline structures are isolated 
tetrahedral, ring, single-chain, double-chain, sheet, and framework.
❯ The three common nonsilicate crystalline structures 
commonly include cubes, hexagonal prisms, and irregular masses, but may also include tetrahedrons.mineral, 
p. 111
silicate mineral, p. 112
nonsilicate mineral, 
p. 113
crystal, p. 114
silicon-oxygen 
tetrahedron,  p. 114
 Section 2 Identifying Minerals
❯ Seven physical properties that help distinguish one mineral 
from another are color, streak, luster, cleavage and fracture, hardness, crystal shape, and density.
❯ Special properties that can aid in identifying certain minerals 
include fluorescence and phosphorescence, chatoyancy and asterism, double refraction, magnetism, and radioactivity.mineralogist, 
p. 117
streak, p. 118
luster, p. 118
cleavage, p. 118
fracture, p. 118
Mohs hardness scale, 
p. 119
density,  p. 120
hq10sena_minsumrev.indd   127hq10sena_minsumrev.indd   127 7/30/08   11:20:09 AM7/30/08   11:20:09 AM PDFReview
5
Chapter
128 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s Crust 1.  Two-Column Notes You already have 
two-column notes for the Key Ideas of Section 1. Complete your notes for the whole 
chapter by creating two-column notes for the Key Ideas of Section 2.
Use each of the following terms in a separate sentence.
 2. silicon-oxygen tetrahedron
 3. mineral
 4. Mohs hardness scale
 5. cleavage
For each pair of terms, explain how the meanings 
of the terms differ.
 6. mineral and crystal
 7. silicate mineral and nonsilicate mineral
 8. luster and streak
 9. fluorescence and phosphorescence
 10. The most common silicate minerals are the
 a. feldspars. c. carbonates.
 b. halides. d. sulfates.
 11. Ninety-six percent of Earth’s crust is made up of
 a. sulfur and lead.
 b. silicate minerals. c. copper and aluminum. d. nonsilicate minerals.
 12. An example of a mineral that has a basic 
structure consisting of isolated tetrahedra linked by atoms of other elements is
 a. mica. c. quartz. b. olivine. d. feldspar.
 13. When two single chains of tetrahedra bond to 
each other, the result is called a 
 a. single-chain silicate. b. sheet silicate. c. framework silicate. d. double-chain silicate.USING KEY TERMS
UNDERSTANDING KEY IDEAS 14. The words waxy, pearly, and dull describe a mineral’s
 a. luster. c. streak. b. hardness. d. fluorescence.
 15. The words uneven and splintery describe a 
mineral’s
 a. cleavage. c. hardness. b. fracture. d. luster.
 16. The ratio of a mineral’s mass to its volume is 
the mineral’s
 a. atomic weight. c. mass. b. density. d. weight.
 17. Double refraction is a property of some crystals of
 a. mica. c. calcite.
 b. feldspar. d. galena.
 18. List six major classes of nonsilicate minerals.
 19. List eight of the most common rock-forming 
minerals.
 20. Why do minerals that have the nonsilicate crystalline structure called closest packing have high density?
 21. Which of the two main groups of minerals is more abundant in Earth’s crust?
 22. Which of the following mineral groups, if any, contain silicon: carbonates, halides, or sulfides?
 23. Describe the tetrahedral arrangement of olivine.
 24. Summarize the characteristics that a substance must have to be classified as a mineral.
 25. How many oxygen ions and silicon ions are in a silicon-oxygen tetrahedron?
 26. Classifying Information Natural gas is a 
substance that occurs naturally in Earth’s crust. 
Is it a mineral? Explain your answer.
 27. Making Comparisons Which of the 
following are you more likely to find in Earth’s 
crust: the silicates feldspar and quartz or the nonsilicates copper and iron? Explain your answer.SHORT ANSWER
CRITICAL THINKING
hq10sena_minsumrev.indd   128hq10sena_minsumrev.indd   128 7/30/08   11:20:22 AM7/30/08   11:20:22 AM PDFChapter 5  Review 129 28. Applying Ideas Iron pyrite, FeS2, is called 
fool’s gold because it looks a lot like gold. What 
simple test could you use to determine whether a mineral sample is gold or pyrite? Explain what the test would show.
 29. Drawing Conclusions Can you determine 
conclusively that an unknown substance 
contains magnetite by using only a magnet? Explain your answer.
 30. Use the following terms to create a concept map: mineral, silicate mineral, nonsilicate mineral, silicon-oxygen tetrahedron, color, density, crystal shape, magnetism, native element, sulfate, and phosphorescence.
 31. Applying Quantities Hematite, Fe
2O3, has 
three atoms of oxygen and two atoms of iron 
in each molecule. What percentage of the atoms in a hematite molecule are oxygen atoms?
 32. Making Calculations A sample of olivine 
contains 3.4 billion silicon-oxygen tetrahedra. 
How many oxygen atoms are in the sample?
 33. Applying Quantities A mineral sample has a 
mass of 51 g and a volume of 15 cm
3. What is 
the density of the mineral sample?
 34. Writing from Research Use the Internet or 
your school library to find a mineral map of the 
United States. Write a brief report that outlines how the minerals in your state are discovered and mined.
 35. Communicating Main Ideas Write and 
illustrate an essay that explains how six different crystal structures form from silicon-oxygen tetrahedra.CONCEPT MAPPING
MATH SKILLS
WRITING SKILLSThis table provides information about the eight most abundant elements in Earth’s crust. Use the table to answer the questions that follow. INTERPRETING GRAPHICS
 The Eight Most Abundant Chemicals in Earth’s Crust
Element Chemical 
symbolWeight (% 
of Earth’s crust)Volume (% of Earth’s crust)*
Oxygen O 46.60 93.8
Silicon Si 27.72 0.9
Aluminum Al 8.13 0.5
Iron Fe 5.00 0.4
Calcium Ca 3.63 1.0
Sodium Na 2.83 1.3
Potassium K 2.59 1.8
Magnesium Mg 2.09 0.3
Total 98.59 100.0
*
The volume of Earth’s crust comprised by all other elements is so 
small that it is essentially 0% when the numbers are rounded to the 
nearest tenth of a percent.
 36. What percentage of the weight of Earth’s crust 
is made of silicon?
 37. Oxygen makes up 93.8% of Earth’s crust by volume, but oxygen is only 46.60% of Earth’s crust by weight. How is this possible?
 38. By comparing the volume and weight percentages of aluminum and calcium, determine which element has the higher density.
hq10sena_minsumrev.indd   129hq10sena_minsumrev.indd   129 7/30/08   11:20:24 AM7/30/08   11:20:24 AM PDF5
Chapter
130 Chapter 5  Minerals of Earth’s CrustStandardized Test Prep
Understanding Concepts
Directions (1–5): For each question, write on a 
separate sheet of paper the letter of the correct answer.
1. Coal is
A. organic and a mineral.
B. inorganic and a mineral.
C. organic and not a mineral.
D. inorganic and not a mineral.
 2. Which of the following is one of the rock-
forming minerals that make up 90% of the mass of Earth’s crust?
F. quartz 
G. fluorite
H. copper
I. talc
 3. In many cases, minerals can be identified by all of the following properties except
A. specimen color.
B. specimen streak.
C. specimen hardness.
D. specimen luster.
 4. All minerals in Earth’s crust  
F. have a crystalline structure.
G. are classified as ring silicates.
H. are classified as pyroxenes or amphiboles.
I. have no silicon in their tetrahedral structure.
 5. Which mineral can be scratched by a fingernail, which has a hardness of 2.5 on the Mohs scale?
A. diamond
B. quartz
C. topaz 
D. talc
Directions (6–8): For each question, write a short 
response.
 6. Carbonates, halides, native elements, oxides, 
sulfates, and sulfides are classes of what mineral group?
 7. What mineral is made up of only the elements oxygen and silicon?
 8. What property is a mineral said to have when a person is able to view double images through it?Reading Skills
Directions (9–11): Read the passage below. Then, 
answer the questions.
Native American Copper
In North America, copper was mined at least 
6,700 years ago by the Native Americans who 
lived on Michigan’s upper peninsula. Much of this mining took place on Isle Royale, an island located in the waters of Lake Superior.
These ancient people removed copper from 
the rock by using stone hammers and wedges. The rock was sometimes heated to make breaking it easier. Copper that was mined was used to make a wide variety of items for the Native Americans including jewelry, tools, weapons, fish hooks, and other objects. These objects were often marked with intricate designs. The copper mined at the Lake Superior site was traded over long distances along ancient trade routes. Copper objects from the region have been found in Ohio, Florida, the Southwest, and the Northwest.
 9. According to the passage, Native Americans 
who mined copper
F. used the mineral as a form of currency 
when buying goods from other tribes.
G. traded copper objects with other Native 
American tribes over a large area.
H. used the mineral to produce vastly superior 
weapons and armor.
I. sold it to the Native Americans living 
around Lake Superior.
 10. Which of the following statements can be inferred from the information in the passage?
A. Copper is a very strong metal and can be 
forged into extremely strong items.
B. Copper mining in the ancient world was 
only common in North America.
C. Copper is a useful metal that can be forged 
into a wide variety of goods.
D. Copper is a weak metal, and no items made 
by the ancient Native Americans remain.
 11. What are some properties of copper that might have made the metal useful to Native Americans? 
hq10sena_minstp.indd   130hq10sena_minstp.indd   130 8/19/08   8:22:17 AM8/19/08   8:22:17 AM PDFIf a question or an answer 
choice contains an unfamiliar term, try to break the word into parts to determine its meaning.
Chapter 5 Standardized Test Prep 131Interpreting Graphics
Directions (12–15): For each question below, record the correct answer on a 
separate sheet of paper.
Base your answers to questions 12 and 13 on the figure below, which shows 
the abundance of various elements in Earth’s crust.
Elements in Earth’s Crust
Oxygen (46.6%) Silicon (27.7%)Aluminum (8.1%)
Iron (5.0%)Calcium (3.6%)
Magnesium (2.1%) Sodium (2.8%)Potassium (2.6%) All others (1.5%)
 12. Which of these elements combines with oxygen to form hematite?
F. calcium  H.  sodium
G. aluminum  I.  iron
 13. Silicate minerals make up about 95% of Earth’s crust. However, the 
elements present in all minerals in this group, oxygen and silicon, make up a significantly smaller percentage of the weight of Earth’s crust. How can this discrepancy be explained?
Base your answers to questions 14 and 15 on the table below, which provides 
information about silicate minerals.
Common Silicates
Mineral Idealized formula Cleavage
Olivine (Mg,Fe)2SiO4none
Pyroxene group (Mg,Fe)SiO3two planes at right angles
Amphibole group Ca2(Mg,Fe)5Si8O22(OH)2two planes at 60° and 120°
Micas, biotite K(Mg,Fe)3AlSi3O10(OH)2one plane
Micas, muscovite KAl2(AlSi3O10)(OH)2one plane
Feldspars, orthoclase KAlSi3O8two planes at 90°
Feldspars, plagioclase (Ca,Na)AlSi3O8two planes at 90°
Quartz SiO2none
 14. How is the cleavage of amphibole minerals similar to that of feldspar 
minerals?
A. Both have two planes.  C.  Both cleave at 60°.
B. Both have one plane.  D.  Both cleave at 90°.
 15. Which minerals are ferromagnesian? How can you identify these minerals? Predict how the chemical composition of ferromagnesian minerals affects the minerals’ density and magnetic properties.
hq10sena_minstp.indd   131hq10sena_minstp.indd   131 7/30/08   4:17:46 PM7/30/08   4:17:46 PM PDF